Document how to release a collection (#77391)
ansible/ansible: docs/docsite/rst/community/collection_contributors/collection_release_with_branches.rst

.. _collection_release_with_branches:

Releasing collections with release branches
============================================

Collections MUST follow the `semantic versioning <https://semver.org/>`_ rules. See :ref:`releasing_collections` for high-level details.

.. contents::
  :local:

Release planning and announcement
----------------------------------

> #. Announce your intention to release the collection in a corresponding pinned release issue / community pinboard of the collection and in the ``#ansible-community`` `Matrix/IRC channel <https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/devel/community/communication.html#real-time-chat>`_ (and in other dedicated channels if exist) in advance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#. Announce your intention to release the collection in a corresponding pinned release issue/community pinboard of the collection and in the ``#ansible-community`` `Matrix/IRC channel <https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/devel/community/communication.html#real-time-chat>`_ (and other dedicated channels if they exist).
```
"in advance," I think isn't necessary. Because "Announcing Intention" is something that's already done in advance.

> #. Announce your intention to release the collection in a corresponding pinned release issue / community pinboard of the collection and in the ``#ansible-community`` `Matrix/IRC channel <https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/devel/community/communication.html#real-time-chat>`_ (and in other dedicated channels if exist) in advance.

Reviewer 2: Announce your intention to release the collection in a corresponding pinned release issue/community pinboard, in the ``#ansible-community`` `Matrix/IRC channel <https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/devel/community/communication.html#real-time-chat>`_ , and in other dedicated channels ( if they exist )in advance.

#. Ensure all the other repository maintainers are informed about the time of the following release.

Releasing major collection versions
-------------------------------------

The new version is assumed to be ``X.0.0``.

> 1. If you are going to release the ``community.general`` and ``community.network`` collections, create new labels ``backport-X`` and ``needs_backport_to_stable_X`` in the corresponding repositories. Copy the styles and descriptions from the corresponding existing labels.

Reviewer 2: If you release the ``community.general`` and ``community.network`` collections, create new ``backport-X`` and ``needs_backport_to_stable_X`` labels in the corresponding repositories. Copy the styles and descriptions from the corresponding existing labels.

Author: I'll be adding these locally to my branch and pushing up the commit. Marking as 'done' as I add locally so I make sure to capture them all. Thanks!

> 2. Ensure you are in a default branch in your local fork (we use ``main`` in the following examples).

Reviewer 2: 2. Ensure you are in a default branch in your local fork. In the following examples below, we use the ``main`` branch.

Reviewer 2: please i was asked to leave a comment about the parenthesis, and how there need not be a lot of them

  .. code-block:: bash

    git status
    git checkout main     # if needed

3. Update your local fork:

  .. code-block:: bash

    git pull --rebase upstream main

Creating the release branch
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> 1. Create a branch ``stable-X`` (replace ``X`` with a proper number) and push it to the **upstream** repository (NOT to the ``origin``):

Reviewer 2: 1. Create a branch ``stable-X`` (replace ``X`` with a correct number) and push it to the **upstream** repository (NOT to the ``origin``):

  .. code-block:: bash

    git branch stable-X main
    git push upstream stable-X

2. Create and checkout to another branch from the ``main`` branch:

  .. code-block:: bash

    git checkout -b update_repo

3. Update the version in ``galaxy.yml`` in the branch to the next **expected** version (for example, ``X.1.0``).

Creating the changelogs
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

1. Replace ``changelogs/changelog.yml`` with:

  .. code-block:: yaml

    ancestor: X.0.0
    releases: {}

> 2. Remove all changelog fragments from ``changelogs/fragments/``. This ensures that every major release has a changelog describing changes since the last major release.

Reviewer 2: 2. Remove all changelog fragments from ``changelogs/fragments/``. Removing the changelog fragments ensures that every major release has a changelog describing changes since the last major release.

3. Add and commit all the changes made. Push the branch to the ``origin`` repository.

> 4. Create a pull request in the collection repository. If CI tests pass, merge it.

Reviewer 2: Create a pull request in the collection repository. If CI tests pass, merge the pull request.

>   Since that, the ``main`` branch is expecting changes for the next minor/major versions

Reviewer 2: Since that, the ``main`` branch is expecting changes for the next minor/major versions.

Reviewer 2: also i think since that sounds a little off, since what ?

5. Switch to the ``stable-X`` branch.

> 6. In the ``stable-X`` branch, make sure that ``galaxy.yml`` contains the correct version number ``X.0.0``. If not, update it!

Reviewer 2: 6. In the ``stable-X`` branch, ensure that ``galaxy.yml`` contains the correct version number ``X.0.0``. If does not, update it.

> 7. In the ``stable-X`` branch, add a changelog fragment ``changelogs/fragments/X.0.0.yml`` with content:

Reviewer 2: 7. In the ``stable-X`` branch, add a changelog fragment ``changelogs/fragments/X.0.0.yml`` with the content:

  .. code-block:: yaml

    release_summary: |-
      Write some text here that should appear as the release summary for this version.
      The format is reStructuredText (but not a list as for regular changelog fragments).
      This text will be inserted into the changelog.

  For example:

  .. code-block:: yaml

    release_summary: This is release 2.0.0 of ``community.foo``, released on YYYY-MM-DD.

> 8. In the stable-X branch, run:

Reviewer 2: 8. In the ``stable-X`` branch, run:

11. In the ``stable-X`` branch, add, commit, and push changes to ``README.md``, ``CHANGELOG.rst`` and ``changelogs/changelog.yaml``, and potentially deleted/archived fragments to the **upstream** repository (NOT to the ``origin``).

Publishing the collection
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

1. In the ``stable-X`` branch, add an annotated tag to the last commit with the collection version ``X.0.0``. Pushing this tag to the ``upstream`` repository will make Zuul publish the collection on `Ansible Galaxy <https://galaxy.ansible.com/>`_.

  .. code-block:: bash

    git tag -n    # see current tags and their comments
    git tag -a NEW_VERSION -m "comment here"    # the comment can be, for example, "community.foo: 2.0.0"
    git push upstream NEW_VERSION

2. Wait until the new version is published on the collection's `Ansible Galaxy <https://galaxy.ansible.com/>`_ page (it will appear in a list of tarballs available to download).

> 3. Add a GitHub release for the new tag. Title should be the version and content ``See https://github.com/ansible-collections/community.xxx/blob/stable-X/CHANGELOG.rst for all changes``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Add a GitHub release for the new tag. The title should be the version and content ``See https://github.com/ansible-collections/community.xxx/blob/stable-X/CHANGELOG.rst for all changes``.
```
@samccann, for content, See ``https://github.com/ansible-collections/community.xxx/blob/stable-X/CHANGELOG.rst`` for all changes... something looks off. Is it meant to be like that? or hyperlinked

Author: @Kikiodazie - in this instance, it is correct. It is a 'fake' example url. The developer would have to change the xxx etc to the real names and releases. You can see an example [here](https://github.com/ansible-collections/community.general/releases/tag/4.6.1).

Reviewer: > @Kikiodazie - in this instance, it is correct. It is a 'fake' example url. The developer would have to change the xxx etc to the real names and releases. You can see an example [here](https://github.com/ansible-collections/community.general/releases/tag/4.6.1).

@samccann Oh. now I see it. Ok then. Then again, I just edited my suggestion. There is no need to backtick the words too. Just the URL is fine

4. Announce the release through the `Bullhorn Newsletter <https://github.com/ansible/community/wiki/News#the-bullhorn>`_.

5. Announce the release in the pinned release issue/community pinboard of the collection and in the ``#ansible-community`` `Matrix/Libera.Chat IRC channel <https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/devel/community/communication.html#real-time-chat>`_.

> 6. In the stable-X branch, update the version in galaxy.yml to the next **expected** version, for example, ``X.1.0``. Add, commit and push to the **upstream** repository.

Reviewer 2: 6. In the ``stable-X branch``, update the version in ``galaxy.yml`` to the next **expected** version, for example, ``X.1.0``. Add, commit and push to the **upstream** repository.

  .. code-block:: yaml

    release_summary: |-
      Write some text here that should appear as the release summary for this version.
      The format is reStructuredText (but not a list as for regular changelog fragments).
      This text will be inserted into the changelog.

3. In the ``stable-X`` branch, run:

  .. code-block:: bash

   antsibull-changelog release

4. In the ``stable-X`` branch, verify that ``CHANGELOG.rst`` looks as expected.

5. In the ``stable-X`` branch, add, commit, and push changes to ``CHANGELOG.rst`` and ``changelogs/changelog.yaml``, and potentially deleted/archived fragments to the **upstream** repository (NOT to the origin).

Publishing the collection
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

1. In the ``stable-X`` branch, add an annotated tag to the last commit with the collection version ``X.Y.0``. Pushing this tag to the ``upstream`` repository will make Zuul publish the collection on `Ansible Galaxy <https://galaxy.ansible.com/>`_.

  .. code-block:: bash

   git tag -n    # see current tags and their comments
   git tag -a NEW_VERSION -m "comment here"    # the comment can be, for example, "community.foo: 2.1.0"
   git push upstream NEW_VERSION

> 2. Wait until the new version is published on the collection's `Ansible Galaxy <https://galaxy.ansible.com/>`_ page (it will appear in a list of tarballs available to download).

Reviewer 2: Wait until the new version is published on the collection's `Ansible Galaxy <https://galaxy.ansible.com/>`_ page. The published version will appear in a list of available tarballs to download.

> 3. Add a GitHub release for the new tag. Title should be the version and content ``See https://github.com/ansible-collections/community.xxx/blob/stable-X/CHANGELOG.rst for all changes``.

Reviewer 2: 3. Add a GitHub release for the new tag. The title should be the version and content ``See https://github.com/ansible-collections/community.xxx/blob/stable-X/CHANGELOG.rst for all changes``.

4. Announce the release through the `Bullhorn Newsletter <https://github.com/ansible/community/wiki/News#the-bullhorn>`_.

5. Announce the release in the pinned release issue/community pinboard of the collection and in the ``#ansible-community`` `Matrix/IRC channel <https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/devel/community/communication.html#real-time-chat>`_. Additionally, you can announce it using GitHub's Releases system.

> 6. In the stable-X branch, update the version in galaxy.yml to the next **expected** version, for example, if you has released ``X.1.0``, the next expected version could be ``X.2.0``. Add, commit and push to the **upstream** repository.

Reviewer 2: 6. In the ``stable-X`` branch, update the version in ``galaxy.yml`` to the next **expected** version, for example, if you has released ``X.1.0``, the next expected version could be ``X.2.0``. Add, commit and push to the **upstream** repository.

7. Checkout to the ``main`` branch.

8. In the ``main`` branch:

>   #. If more minor versions are released before the next major version, update the version in galaxy.yml to ``X.(Y+1).0`` as well. Create a dedicated pull request and merge.

Reviewer 2: #. If more minor versions are released before the next major version, update the version in ``galaxy.yml`` to ``X.(Y+1).0``. Create a dedicated pull request and merge.

>   #. If the next version will be a new major version, create a pull request where you update the version in ``galaxy.yml`` to ``(X+1).0.0``. Note that the sanity tests will most likely fail since there will be deprecations with removal scheduled for ``(X+1).0.0``, which are flagged by the tests.

Reviewer 2: #. If the next version will be a new major version, create a pull request where you update the version in ``galaxy.yml`` to ``(X+1).0.0``. Note that the sanity tests will most likely fail since there will be deprecations with removal scheduled for ``(X+1).0.0``, which are flagged by the tests.

I dont really understand this line, im guess maybe it should say "create a pull request where you want to update the version"

>   For every such deprecation, decide whether to remove them now (it makes sense if you remove the complete ``modules/plugins``,

Reviewer 2: i think this line needs to be reworded

>   For every such deprecation, decide whether to remove them now (makes sense if complete ``modules/plugins`` are removed,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  For every such deprecation, decide whether to remove them now (it makes sense if you remove the complete ``modules/plugins``,
```

>   or redirects are removed), or whether to add ignore entries to the corresponding ``tests/sanity/ignore-*.txt`` file and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  or you remove redirects). Or whether to add ignore entries to the corresponding ``tests/sanity/ignore-*.txt`` file and
```

  create issues (makes sense for removed features in ``modules/plugins``).

>   Once CI passes, merge the pull request. Make sure that this pull request is merged not too much later after the release

Reviewer 2: im guessing the CI is like a test.

Maybe if we said "Once the CI test passes"

>   for ``verison_added`` sanity tests not to expect the wrong version for new feature pull request.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  for ``verison_added`` sanity tests not to expect the wrong version for the new feature pull request.
```

4. Add a changelog fragment ``changelogs/fragments/X.Y.Z.yml`` with content:

  .. code-block:: yaml

    release_summary: |-
      Write some text here that should appear as the release summary for this version.
      The format is reStructuredText (but not a list as for regular changelog fragments).
      This text will be inserted into the changelog.

  Add to git and commit.

5. Generate the changelogs.

.. code-block:: bash

   antsibull-changelog release

6. Verify that ``CHANGELOG.rst`` looks as expected.

7. Add and commit changes to ``CHANGELOG.rst`` and ``changelogs/changelog.yaml``, and potentially deleted/archived fragments.

**Publishing the collection**

1. Add an annotated tag to the last commit with the collection version ``X.Y.Z``. Pushing this tag to the ``upstream`` repository will make Zuul publish the collection on `Ansible Galaxy <https://galaxy.ansible.com/>`_.

  .. code-block:: bash

   git tag -n    # see current tags and their comments
   git tag -a NEW_VERSION -m "comment here"    # the comment can be, for example, "community.foo: 2.1.1"
   git push upstream NEW_VERSION

> 2. Wait until the new version is published on the collection's `Ansible Galaxy <https://galaxy.ansible.com/>`_ page (it will appear in a list of tarballs available to download).

Reviewer 2: 2. Wait until the new version is published on the collection's `Ansible Galaxy <https://galaxy.ansible.com/>`_ page (it will appear in a list of tarballs available to download).

I think we should remove the parenthesis and reword the statement

> 3. Add a GitHub release for the new tag. Title should be the version and content ``See https://github.com/ansible-collections/community.xxx/blob/stable-X/CHANGELOG.rst for all changes``.

Reviewer 2: maybe an article before title like, "The title", i dont know if that is what you were going for, just my opinion.

  .. note::

    The data for this release is only contained in a tag, and not in a branch (in particular not in ``stable-X``).

>     This is intended, since the next minor release ``X.(Y+1).0`` already contains the changes for ``X.Y.Z`` as well

Reviewer 2: maybe say "This is deliberate" instead
